now as much as we love epic space
battles with blasters cutting through
the black void
and causing cheerful booms that's not
exactly what happens when something
explodes in the big black space is
basically vacuum
meaning it has no oxygen and oxygen is
an essential part of any process of
burning we have here on earth
you might argue that stars can burn and
explode into supernova
but that's not exactly true either stars
don't rely on oxygen so
they're not burning there are constant
thermonuclear reactions going on inside
them
so a spaceship can only explode like
that if it has a nuclear power plant
installed in it
if it doesn't then the only special
effect you get
is a brief flash that disappears in the
blink of an eye
liquid oxygen which is often on board
spaceships is very quick to burn out in
the vacuum of outer space
as for the boom oxygen plays a crucial
role here too
sound only travels thanks to molecules
of air bumping into each other
since there's no air in space the whole
scene would be
pretty much absolutely silent and that's
not a bad thing either
just imagine how deafening would the sun
be if the sound could travel in space
despite what many sci-fi directors want
us to believe
there's no dark side to the moon our
satellite is tidally locked with earth
meaning it's always turned to us with
one side
while the other always looks away the
sun is much farther from us than the
moon
and we're both turning round and round
warming and lighting the side and that
in turn
it means that once in every short while
the moon is lit by the sun from either
side
it's just that we can't see it from
where we are
while things appear weightless in outer
space there's
actual gravity all over the place it
becomes weaker the further you get from
a heavy object
like our planet but it's still there in
fact
there's not a single place in the
universe that isn't affected by gravity
of this or that cosmic object
everything that has mass has gravity as
well yes
even you and me but space objects are so
massive
that they tug smaller things towards
them that's why the planets of the solar
system
orbit around the sun and our whole milky
way galaxy orbits around its own center
scientists believe there's a
supermassive black hole there
about four million times heavier than
the sun which keeps all the stars and
systems from flying apart
our movie hero leaves the orbit of mars
on their trusty spaceship
and heads on towards jupiter their face
is grim
and determined even though they know
what threat awaits them ahead
the asteroid belt they pitch and yaw
dodging the asteroid flying at enormous
speeds toward the spacecraft
but one of them still hits it no just a
scratch thankfully
finally our hero leaves the danger zone
and wipes the sweat from the brow with a
shaking hand
sounds familiar but couldn't be further
from the truth
asteroids in the belt between mars and
jupiter are so few
and far between that if you ever travel
through it
you might not even encounter one the
whole way
there are about 1.5 million sizable
space rocks flying there
give or take a half million but let's
not forget space is a vast place
the distance between two asteroids of
any significant size
would be millions of miles so a space
chase with two ships
weaving between floating rocks would be
quite boring in there
space is often depicted as a black cold
and desolate place
especially when a movie astronaut leaves
the safety of their spaceship
everything about this description is
okay except for the cold part
it's only true if you find yourself in
some really far
corner of our galaxy that has no nearby
stars
but if you're for example in the earth's
orbit and directly facing the
sun the temperature in the cosmic vacuum
could reach
a scorching 250 degrees that's why
spacesuits are white
this color reflects light better than
any other still
the temperature at your back which isn't
exposed to the sun's
rays can be really freezing indeed heat
doesn't spread equally through space
so if you're not turned towards a heat
source you get very
very cold speaking about the sun it
somehow
always appears yellow in movies the fact
is
the color we see from earth is an
optical illusion
created by our planet's atmosphere just
as the blue sky during the day
the light from the sun spreads in the
atmosphere and gets distorted
making colorful spectacles at dawn and
does
in the vacuum of space there's nothing
to reflect the light
so the sun appears as it really is white
that ball of glowing gas is that hot
there's a bright flash in the sky
followed by a tail of smoke
and a red-hot space rock crashes into
the ground
leaving a huge charred crater after
impact
well although the smokey tail and the
crater are
partly true meteorites don't really have
a chance to become that hot while
falling
meteorite is an asteroid that somehow
entered the earth's atmosphere
and survived the friction enough to fall
on the surface
this happens pretty often we just don't
usually see those rocks
because they're normally quite small and
fall into uninhabited areas
but even if one falls within a city the
crater would appear because of the sheer
speed of the meteorite
not its heat they do get much hotter
because of friction
yet not so much as to burn everything on
the ground on impact
as much as we want to believe in instant
communication between spaceships and
planets
it's not possible at least not yet
modern communication
systems rely on radio signals that have
a pretty slow speed
compared to the vast expanses of space
it would take years
for such a signal to travel even one
light year let alone hundreds and
thousands
if you want to send a message to a
galaxy far far away
be prepared to wait a couple of
millennia and then
a couple more to receive a reply on that
note
space is not as crowded and full of
events as is often shown on the silver
screen
it's mostly a rather lonely place where
planets stars and other objects
are separated by billions of miles of
nothingness
even if you have a spaceship that can
travel at the speed of light
most of the time you'll only see black
void full of stars and planets
far away the distances are enormous out
there
even between the closest objects for a
better understanding
the moon which you can see so well on a
clear night
is about 239 000 miles away
as like traveling around the earth
almost 10 times in a row
warp drives that can distort space-time
and get you to a distant corner of an
alien galaxy in the blink of an eye
that's a staple of any space opera
spaceships capable of such a feat
are always shown as instantly
accelerating from zero to
faster than light according to the law
of physics
people on board should well at least be
pushed into their seats
hard more strictly speaking no one would
be able to survive such an acceleration
because it's too many g's on a fragile
human body
until we find a way to reduce the
effects of overload
we can't even start thinking of space
warps
water isn't the rarest and most precious
resource in the universe
in fact there's a humongous space cloud
several million light years away from us
that consists entirely of water its
reserves would be enough to fill
all our oceans 140 trillion times over
and many planets some even in our solar
system
seem to have liquid water on them the
most precious resource in space
is life and that requires a lot more
stuff to appear than just
liquid water astronauts are often shown
working out on the iss
and sci-fi space stations and that much
is true
they do need physical activity but the
reason isn't that they need
strong bodies to work in space the
gravity out there is much weaker
and astronauts don't use their muscles
as much as on earth
so when they come back to the surface
gravity hits them as a sledgehammer
and their bodies feel squishy to
alleviate those effects
they train every day although
they say we can see millions of stars on
a clear starry night
that number is much more modest about
three thousand
all the rest are other objects that are
also luminous
and mistaken for stars planets distant
galaxies
and even artificial satellites they're
simply being illuminated by real stars
just like the moon and become seen but
because they're
that far away we can't tell if they're
stars or not
still you gotta admit it's all still
pretty cool